---
layout: post
title: 'REST API's'
subtitle: Information & Testing ideas
bigimg: /img/path.jpg
published: true
---

### What is an API?

# What is an API?
An API is short for Application Programming Interface.  This is essentially a way of sharing application data over the internet (HTTP API). Using a magnitude of API's we can build a hybrid application calling information from various sources e.g twitter, google, facebook, youtube etc all under one roof.  They are also extremely useful for integrating with third parties.  For example, if we have an application that allows you to Create, Edit, Delete and Update products, we could create a HTTP API with the following:

[@GET - View Products](http://example.com/view_products)

[@POST - Create A Product](http://example.com/create_new_product?productName=example)

[@PUT - Update a Product By Id](http://example.com/update_product?id=11&name=example)

[@DELETE - Delete Product By Id](http://example.com/delete_product?id=11)

Not so sure I like the above approach..

---

### What is REST?
REST stands for REpresentational State Transfer (RE-S-T).  This is a standard way of creating HTTP API's which typically consist of the following actions: View, Create, Edit and Delete which can be mapped directly to HTTP verbs: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE.  These are outlined below:

**GET:** `Used to Read/Retrieve a representation of a resource.  Get returns a representation in XML/JSON and typically a response code of 200.`

**POST:** `Used to typically CREATE new resources.  POST typically returns a response code of 201. POST is non-idempotent, care is advised.`

**PUT:** `Used to typically UPDATE existing resources.  PUT is idempotent. PUT typically returns a response code of 200 (or 204 if empty body)`

**DELETE:** `Used to typically DELETE existing resources.  DELETE typically returns a 200 OK response code or 404 not found if resource cannot be found.`

Following on from the previous example then, If we wanted to view ALL products, our URL would look like this:

	@GET - (http://example.com/products)
    
Creating a new product by POSTING the data

	@POST - (http://example.com/products)
    Data =
  	Name: NewProduct


To View a particular product, we would GET again, e.g Product ID = 123

	@GET -  (http://www.example.com/products/123) 

Update our product using PUTTING the new data

  	 @PUT - (http://www.example.com/products/123)
     Data = 
     Name: NewName
     Price: $25`
   
Delete our recently edited product using DELETE:

    @DELETE -  (http://www.example.com/products/123)

You might have noticed from the previous examples that REST URLs use a consistent naming scheme. When you are interacting with an API, you are almost always manipulating some sort of object. In our examples, this is a Product. In REST terminology, this is called a Resource. The first part of the URL is always the plural form of the resource:

Example 1 - Always used when referring to Add One or List All Actions

	Product Object = http://www.example/products

Example 2 - Always used when referring to Add One or List All Actions

	Widget Object = http://www.example/widgets   

Example 3 - Always used when referring to Add One or List All Actions

	Person Object = http://www.example/people

However when working with a particular resource, you specify the particular ID to the URL:
Example 1 - A particular product resource

    Product Object = http://www.example/products/123

Example 2 - A particular widget resource

    Widget Object = http://www.example/widgets/456

Example 1 - A particular person resource

    Person Object = http://www.example/people/789    

This URL would typically be used when you want to View, Edit or Delete a particular resource

### Nested Resources
Lets say our products have multiple People associated with them, to list all the users associated with a particular product resource we would use the following:

List all users associated with a Product resource:

	 @GET (http://example.com/products/123/users)

Adding a new user against a particular Product:

     @POST (http://www.example.com/products/123/users)
     Data = 
     Name: Simon
   
Best practice generally recommends that you do not go too deep with nested resources, typically nothing more than two levels deep, but like a lot of things with REST there is very little *concrete* specification / design guidelines, it offers that freedom to the creators as opposed to SOAP which is rather heavily governed.

### HTTP Response Codes

It is important to respond with the correct response code to the type of request that was made.  When a request is made the **Server** will respond with a code which corresponds to wether the request was successful or not and how the client should then proceed.  There are a range of different potential codes, these are outlined below:

    1xx = informative

    2xx = Success

    3xx = Redirection

    4xx = User Error

    5xx = Server Error

# Success Codes:

    200 - OK (Default)  

    201 - Creation success`  

    202 - Accepted (Often used when Deleting resources)

# User Error Codes:

    400 - Bad Request (Input error/bad data typically)

    401 - Lack of Authorisation (Required to login/auth)

    404 - Not found (Bad URL)

    405 - Method isn't permitted (Wrong Method Type)

    409 - Confliction (Trying to duplicate the resource with a PUT request)

    415 - Unsupported media Type


For all others ranging 1xx - 6xx, please see the following documentation (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes)

### API Response Formats
When we make an HTTP request we can specify which format we wish to receive back, However it is the **Servers** responsibility to respond with the format requested.  For example if we wish to display a webpage we want to be given back HTML.  REST API's typically respond in JSON nowadays which stands for JavaScript Object Notation.  So when requesting and wanting JSON back -

    GET /products
    Accept: application/json

This will return an array of our products, formatting in JSON

    [
      {
        id: 123,
        name: 'Product One'
        price: '25'
      },

      {
        id: 456,
        name: 'Product Two'
        price: '350'
      }
    ]

If the user requests a format that we haven't implemented, what do we do? You can throw some type of error, but we should really be enforcing JSON as the standard response format

### What to lookout for when Testing REST API's?

1. Http Responses return correct status codes, examine code to see if custom Responses are being built and returned, for example a successful add (@POST) may return a 201 - Created rather than the 200 - OK.

2. Http Headers are returning any customisations, we can return unique header / meta data, for example Location baseURI/absolutePath etc, ensure these are accounted for in the returned response

3. Http Content type is returned accurately,  Our client may be asking for XML/JSON but is the server coping with it? what are you receiving back?  As well as the request response type being for example TEXT_PLAIN, what happens? [application/json etc]

4. Resource URI's are logically mapped and well designed, e.g /webapi/messages/1/comments/2 will return commentID 2 of MessageID 1 following a successful @GET request, this is a good design, /webapi/getMessages?messageId=1 in this instance, is subpar design - WHY? when we want to then add messages we need additional paths to handle it? or POST to getMessages? with an add? with the design example #1 we can handle all our CRUD operations smartly and logically.

5. @Context @PathParam, @QueryParam, @MatrixParam, @HeaderParam, @CookieParam are all being received by the server accurately, extremely important when exception handling and responding suitably to the client.

6. Exception handling is well thought out and implemented, a generic handler throwing throwable is garbage (all exceptions will be caught by it), smart use of WebApplicationException is ideal as they come preconditioned with certain status codes etc, however we can drill down even more than that to a child Exception, for example - build a custom response in our ExceptionWrapper class to catch DataNotFoundException and return it to the client when the exception occurs - Why? We can return a JSON response to the client with accurate information on the problem, this stops our exception bubbling to hit the Framework/Tomcat handler which will return HTML, we dont want our REST API returning HTML and we want our developer/clients to receive meaningful JSON formatted data back in the event of errors.

7. QueryParamaters are logically designed and are successfully applied to them in the backend, for example ?year=2014&month=Jan - ensure both the clients input are successfully captured, and the data is filtered properly according to code logic, good chance to create some exceptions here, nullPointerException for example, investigate and attempt to break it.

8. Ultimately Data returned is accurate! Ensure no data leakage is occuring and the client is unable to manipulate our API in order to receive non permitted data, its smart to build in some sort of filtering or pagination to the responses using QueryParamaters for the client, for example with big data I might only want 10 messages back from getAllMessages() @GET - /webapi/messages?size=10

9. Security is well designed, authentification is solid, am I able to pass in a queryparamater to see someone elses list of products from my company? this is a security problem.

10. API implements HATEOAS if applicable, there are hyperlinks if you like in the responses, for example I'm viewing a comment via @GET /webapi/messages/1/comments/2 - my JSON response should have links to self, the message linked to the comment and the profile or author of said message too,  think of it as a quick way to navigate like web hyperlinks, this allows developers/clients to work more efficiently.

11. @PUT @GET @POST @DELETE operations are all working as expected, this will require access to the source to verify (whitebox).

12. Response times are respectable, obviously big data can affect this and working on LAN is not a real representation sometimes, however it should not be doing any sort of hanging, crashing or extremely long response times.  

13. Build up a POSTMAN suite as soon as possible to automate the execution of basic tests of your API, get verifications and assertions in there and attach it onto the build pipeline to have executing on each deployment, consider setting up NEWMAN to generate a report and email to interested parties automatically with the results.

14. idempotence testing - what do we mean by this? idempotence basically means if you send the same request e.g a @POST is NON-IDEMPOTENT multiple times its going to be creating data each time and affecting the database / webapplication data.  @POST needs some care and if applicable try build in some logic for it / smartly design your web application to account for postback via the users browser. @PUT @GET and @DELETE are all considered IDEMPOTENT - WHY? Multiple GET is safe, Multiple DELETE is fine - content not found worst case as its been deleted, @PUT is safe - Multiple PUT will just overwrite an existing object
    
